chapters/4-intro-electronics.md, before:

## Chapter 4 -- Electronics and Grove

### What is a voltage?

To build circuits and make the devices that use modern technology, we want to send signals from sensors to controllers, and from controllers to an output.

The way we send those signals is by sending electrons from one place to another, the movement of electrons through is circuit is called *current*.

The way create a current is to apply a *voltage*, a difference in voltage between two points in a circuit will cause current to flow.

So there are two things we want to keep track of in electronic circuits: **voltage** and **current**.

Two things to remember:
* **Voltage is _across_ things**
* **Current flows _through_ things**

The voltage at any point in the circuit generally means **the potential difference between that point and ground**.

### Relating voltage and current: resistors

The current *through* a device is proportional to the voltage *across* it.

This gives us the relationship called Ohm's Law, which is the most important equation in electronics.

![Ohm's Law](https://latex.codecogs.com/svg.latex?V%20%3D%20IR)

The *voltage* is the *resistance* times the *current*.

**Remeber this equation!** Seriously.

### Series and parallel

Resistors in series look like this:

![Resistors](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/1/11/Resistors_in_series.svg)

To total resistance is just the sum of their resistances together.

![Resistors in series](https://latex.codecogs.com/svg.latex?R_%7Btot%7D%20%3D%20R_1%20&plus;%20R_2%20&plus;%20...%20&plus;%20R_n)

So when something is *in series*, it means that the only way for current to flow is through the device.

Parallel resistors means there are *multiple paths for current to flow*.

![Parallel resistors](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/0/09/Resistors_in_parallel.svg)

The equation, if you care about that sort of thing....

![Parallel equation](https://latex.codecogs.com/svg.latex?R_%7Btot%7D%20%3D%20%5Cfrac%7B1%7D%7B%5Cfrac%7B1%7D%7BR_1%7D%20&plus;%20%5Cfrac%7B1%7D%7BR_2%7D%20&plus;%20...%20&plus;%20%5Cfrac%7B1%7D%7BR_n%7D%7D)

Commit message:

Added analog and digital to electronics Added pull up and down

chapters/4-intro-electronics.md, after:

## Chapter 4 -- Electronics

### What is a voltage?

To build circuits and make the devices that use modern technology, we want to send signals from sensors to controllers, and from controllers to an output.

The way we send those signals is by sending electrons from one place to another, the movement of electrons through is circuit is called *current*.

The way create a current is to apply a *voltage*, a difference in voltage between two points in a circuit will cause current to flow.

So there are two things we want to keep track of in electronic circuits: **voltage** and **current**.

Two things to remember:
* **Voltage is _across_ things**
* **Current flows _through_ things**

The voltage at any point in the circuit generally means **the potential difference between that point and ground**.

### Relating voltage and current: resistors

The current *through* a device is proportional to the voltage *across* it.

This gives us the relationship called Ohm's Law, which is the most important equation in electronics.

![Ohm's Law](https://latex.codecogs.com/svg.latex?V%20%3D%20IR)

The *voltage* is the *resistance* times the *current*.

**Remember this equation!** Seriously. It's the foundation of everything.

### What is resistance?

Like it's name would suggest, it resists current flow. Current can flow much easier through a circuit with lower resistance, but very little current will flow in a circuit with a large resistance. More resistance, less electrons flowing. The unit of resistance is an ohm (Ω).

### Series and parallel

Resistors in series look like this:

![Resistors](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/1/11/Resistors_in_series.svg)

To total resistance is just the sum of their resistances together.

![Resistors in series](https://latex.codecogs.com/svg.latex?R_%7Btot%7D%20%3D%20R_1%20&plus;%20R_2%20&plus;%20...%20&plus;%20R_n)

So when something is *in series*, it means that the only way for current to flow is through the device.

When something is in *parallel*, it means there are *multiple paths for current to flow*.

So parallel resistors look like this:

![Parallel resistors](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/0/09/Resistors_in_parallel.svg)

The equation, if you care about that sort of thing....

![Parallel equation](https://latex.codecogs.com/svg.latex?R_%7Btot%7D%20%3D%20%5Cfrac%7B1%7D%7B%5Cfrac%7B1%7D%7BR_1%7D%20&plus;%20%5Cfrac%7B1%7D%7BR_2%7D%20&plus;%20...%20&plus;%20%5Cfrac%7B1%7D%7BR_n%7D%7D)


## Analog and Digital

**Analog** (should be analogue but we're lazy) deals with *continuous* values, or *ranges of values*. So when we want to measure ranges of things, it will generally be an analog circuit.

**Digital** circuits are either *on* or *off*. We don't do ranges anymore, it's a binary world. On or off. 0s or 1s. That's it.

The world is in analog, and digital is us making constraints on it. So if it's a thing like "pressing a button" or "turning on a light", it's digital. If we're *measuring a range*, it's analog.
